---
title: "Finance in Sport - An unexplored world explained in laymen ways"
date: 2018-12-01 01:00:00
author: "Nagendra Kumar"
image: "../../images/sportfinance.png"
tags:
  - coding
  - web dev
---

We’d like to announce the start of our brand-new Finance in Sports series, in which we’ll discover some interesting concepts of finance in sports and maybe the sporting economy as a whole. You might find that a lot of the articles in this series will be about Association Football because it is the one sport that resembles a real free market the most out of any sport, but we’ll try to cover as many different sports as possible, to interest all kinds of readership.

Hyperinflation generally coincides with wars and a series of ill-advised and inflammatory fiscal policy decisions, but at the core is a result of a rapid increase in the money supply that is not supported by growth in the economy. This concept of hyperinflation of markets is important to the following article about Financial Fair Play regulation in European Football.

Three of the four semi-finalists of the 2020-21 version of the UEFA Champions League are clubs owned by oligarchs willing to fund hundreds of millions of euros into their clubs to achieve the coveted UCL prize. Therefore, it is fitting that we first discuss FFP. As we’ve already mentioned, football is the closest thing in sports to a free market, and thus clubs can be owned any number/kind of persons, with different net-worth and ambitions. The billionaire revolution started in the early years of this century, and until then most clubs were owned by fans. Billionaire owners want to make significant investment in the short so as to establish their clubs amongst the best and hope for it to become a sustainable money-making machine in the future.

The first significant Oligarch to take over a club was probably Roman Abramovic, Chelsea’s billionaire Russian owner. He took over a mid-table Chelsea, in a dire financial situation on the cheap, invested heavily into the team, club infrastructure and the brand and is now reaping the benefits, with Chelsea recently lifting the Champions League title. Few other famous examples of this are the current ownership of PSG and Man City, who’ve also pursued a similar approach and have tasted success to varying degrees. Such clubs did not hold back in their investment plans and did not hesitate to break transfer records to purchase even unrealistic targets at unrealistic prices. This caused the market as a whole to respond by increasing the prices of their players, which caused never before seen levels of inflation. Another very important factor to consider is the increased marketability of the premier league, which brought in unimaginable TV money and also increased transfer demands from clubs from other countries. Another oft forgotten factor is the Florentino Perez’s Galactico strategy. Real Madrid was a very successful team and were (and are) one of the richest clubs in the world. Their Galactico approach to recruit players involved breaking the world record for transfers multiple times, which skewed and inflated the market a lot. The above reasons compelled low budget clubs to spend more money beyond their means, causing them financial difficulties.

Back in 2010, then UEFA President Michel Platini said something must be done about the "financial doping" that is going on in European football. With so many such factors acting towards inflating the market and a growing disparity between clubs that don’t have rich owners to pump money into their clubs and the ones that do, UEFA introduced the Financial Fair Play (FFP) Regulations in 2011-12, to level the field financially, so that clubs don’t spend more than what they earn, and live within their means, so as to increase the financial health of the market. Under UEFA guidelines, clubs are allowed to spend €5 million (\$5.6 million) more than they earn per assessment period — which lasts three years. However, the limit becomes €30 million (previously €45 million) if these losses can be covered by the owners of the club or a related party. Since 2015, investments in stadiums, training facilities, youth development and women's football are not included in the break-even calculations. If the clubs fail to follow these regulations it may lead to Sanctions, points deductions, fines and disqualification from European competitions.

By now, we’ve all come to the realization that such laws never stop rich people from doing things the way they want, they just find a loophole. Many owners of such clubs, like Man City, have found ways to circumvent these rules by exploiting the ambiguous nature of their sponsorship rules. They overstate their sponsorship payments, so they can pump in more money into the club. According to UEFA, if a club owner has injected money into the club through a sponsorship deal with a company they are related to, UEFA will investigate and, should the situation permit, adapt the calculations of the break-even result for the revenues to the level that is appropriate ('fair value') and in-keeping with market prices. In 2014, 20 clubs were found to be in violation of the FFP rules, two of which were Man City and PSG. They were both fined 60 million euros, with a 40 million euros suspended fine, sanctions, and a few other restrictions in the registration process of the UEFA Champions League.
